It doesn't look like much, but this is
the prize for the rest of the world in
trying to catch up with China.
>> We need rare earths.
>> China owns them, processes them, refines
them, and sells them. The entire supply
chain is built around Beijing.
>> No matter what you do, you're always
kind of beholden to China.
>> Rare earths are really the backbone of
modern technology.
>> China's the ballgame. They're 80 to 90%
of production and processing of rare
earths that go into all equipment around
the world.
>> And China's shown it will use that
dominance as geopolitical leverage.
>> The main use of rare earths are in these
powerful, high-performance magnets.
>> China's capacity for magnets is vast
compared to the rest of the world.
>> When Donald Trump returned to the White
House in 2025 and rebooted the US-China
trade war, China responded with export
controls on rare earths that exposed
just how much Western manufacturing
still depends on China's supply.
>> The automotive industry came out and not
so quietly said, "We are going to have
to shut down factories if we cannot get
these permanent magnets."
>> That shock set off a broader scramble to
build a new supply chain from mine to
magnet.
>> This is a story about not letting one
country hold all the chips on what is a
very important supply chain.
>> The US-China trade war has begun.
>> In case you'd forgotten how influential
rare earths are, it was little more than
a year ago that they forced a pause in
the US-China trade war.
>> We have a 145% tariff on Chinese goods.
Neither one wants to be the one to pick
up the phone first.
>> In April 2025, US President Donald Trump
slapped huge tariffs on Chinese imports.
Beijing fought back, pulling out its
rare earth bazooka.
>> The automotive CEOs from Detroit were
all showing up telling Donald Trump, "If
you do not get those permanent magnets,
which are made from the rare earths,
moving back into the United States,
we're going to have to start shutting
factories."
>> Beijing had located the weak spot, and
at the center of it was a group of
metals most people never think about.
>> Rare earths are a group of 17 metallic
elements that are chemically very
similar.
>> They can seem obscure, but the important
thing is what they do. They help create
powerful, heat-resistant magnets.
>> They're used in, you know, most of our
modern technologies, especially in
electric motors. They make our gadgets
smaller, lighter, and more powerful.
>> From phones and wind turbines to
electric vehicles and missile systems,
rare-earth magnets sit inside much of
modern technology.
And that means the global high-tech
economy relies on one country.
>> China's home to the world's largest
rare-earth deposit that's been
discovered so far, and specifically, it
has deposits of heavy rare earths,
whereas the US has very, very little.
>> Heavy rare earths are the most expensive
and sought after. They allow
high-performance magnets to resist heat
and demagnetization.
>> The real choke point is the processing
stage. China controls 90% of the
refining process, and then it goes to
magnet production, which is a process of
making rare-earth metals into magnets,
and China controls about 90% of that as
well.
>> Mining the ore is only the start. The
real work is in the chemistry.
Separating and refining each element
into something magnet makers can use.
>> The production is so costly and also
environmentally very damaging because
the processing stage, you know, produces
a lot of toxic waste including
radioactive materials. So, a lot of
Western countries they're happy to let
China take over.
>> And you can see why.
This is Baotou in Inner Mongolia, home
to China's largest rare earth production
site.
>> Wherever you are in the world at some
level of that supply chain, you are
probably reliant on Chinese products.
>> With China holding such a dominant
position, why did it come as such a
shock to the Trump administration when
they chose to use it?
>> Really shouldn't happen because China
used exact leverage 15 years ago.
>> Perhaps because last time it wasn't the
US in the crosshairs, it was Japan.
>> China first used its dominance over rare
earths as a geopolitical weapon in 2010
when it restricted exports to Japan
because of a territorial dispute.
>> China said, "Okay, we are going to
restrict the exports of our rare earths
that you need, Japan, to turn into the
permanent magnets that go into your
automotive industry and other
industries." This was the first kind of
shock to the market.
>> It lasted only weeks. Even so, it
exposed Japan's vulnerability and
offered an early warning of how much
leverage China had built.
To understand how that happened, we have
to rewind.
>> Actually, the US was the biggest player
in rare earth all the way from the 1950s
to the 1980s. China is a latecomer in
the industry, but it caught up really
fast.
>> This was not an accident. Beijing
treated rare earths as a strategic
industry and built capacity all the way
down the chain.
>> China's late paramount leader Deng
Xiaoping has said famously that the
Middle East has its oil, but China has
its rare earths.
>> As China scaled up, it became cheaper to
buy from there than to make it anywhere
else. In the West, thin margins, high
labor costs, and dirty processing pushed
many operators out.
>> Consumers were happy with the status quo
because they got steady flow of cheap,
reliable supplies of magnets from China
for many, many years.
>> But now the risks of relying so much on
China are clear, forcing countries to
make their own rare earth plays.
This is the largest rare earth
processing site outside of China.
It's run by the Australian mining
company Lynas,
which has a $96 million contract to
supply heavy rare earths to the US
Department of Defense.
>> Lynas is really the leader in the wave
of companies now trying to rebuild the
rare earth supply chain outside of
China. They started more than a decade
ago, took them a long time to start
ramping up production.
>> Lynas aims to produce over 10,000 tons
of rare earths oxides per year from this
site. But most importantly, it's worked
out how to produce heavy rare earths.
>> We broke the monopoly on separated heavy
rare earths last year in May 2025. We
are the only producer at scale of both
separated lights and separated heavies
outside of China.
>> Rebuilding a supply chain this
specialized also means rebuilding
skills, experience, and industrial
muscle.
>> Last year in the US, they graduated
35,000 lawyers. They graduated 350
mining engineers.
>> Meanwhile, China has a dedicated mining
and engineering university with 25,000
undergraduate students.
>> China has invested in developing
competence in the rare earth market and
getting better and being more efficient
every day.
>> And the urgency for the US has only
grown as its war with Iran has depleted
the Pentagon's advanced weapon stocks.
>> We've seen the US burning through its
stockpiles of defense systems and weapon
systems really quickly. And the US will
need to replenish the stockpiles. And to
make weapons and defense systems, it
requires rare earth.
>> The US military's exact demand is
classified, but a recent report by the
Center for Strategic and International
Studies estimates during the Iran war,
the US has used more than half of its
pre-war inventory of some very expensive
munitions.
>> There is definitely a sense of urgency,
and it's not just the United States. It
is the Western world.
>> If countries want an alternative to
China, they need more than new
factories. They also need new deposits.
And Brazil is one of the main bets.
Latin America's biggest economy is home
to roughly a quarter of the world's rare
earths, according to the US Geological
Survey.
This site in southeastern Brazil is run
by another Australian developer,
Meteoric Resources, that's also
receiving backing from the US.
The company says there are 1.5 billion
tons of rare earth clay in these hills.
>> Our main objective right now is to put
the project in production, to be the
next to the world to produce the mixed
rare earth carbonates, and to develop
the technology to do the separation.
Then we can do that differently as China
does right now. If you want to be
sustainable, you have to buy from a
sustainable market.
>> And the US is also investing at home.
Their biggest hope is the
Pentagon-backed MP Materials. The
Department of Defense bought a $400
million stake in the company in 2025.
It expects to be able to separate heavy
rare earths later this year.
But the problem for every would-be
challenger, China's big enough to
squeeze margins long before new
competitors are secure.
>> The Western world are intervening and
saying that they're willing to put up
money to build out these companies, to
effectively be a partner that says,
"We're going to backstop any chance that
China takes to flush you out of the
market."
>> China's restrictions on rare earth
exports to the US have been relaxing,
but its ban on exports for use in US
weapons is a red line.
>> I think the main lesson we can draw is
that building up the supply chain takes
time and a lot of efforts. Japan's
dependence on China only reduced from
90% in 2010 to about 60 to 70% now. So,
you can tell that the 15-year process is
long and it's slow.
>> If you're a company that wants 60% from
China or 40% from the rest of the world,
or 50/50, that's a more realizable goal
up to 2030 and into the early next
decade.
>> A Bloomberg Intelligence report
estimates $10 billion of public funds
will be invested in rare earth ventures
outside of China in 2026.
That's a big turnaround.
>> The monopoly is not going to be broken
within the next 5 years. But, the US,
Australia, Brazil, Japan, South Korea,
France will all begin producing some
commercial scale of permanent magnets of
rare earths. And if you're sitting here
5 years from now and those nations are
all producing stuff that actually goes
out the door to major buyers, then
that's a win.